Apollo
Soyuz. Apollo Soyuz. Yeah. We've been told the
benefits, mostly in a diplomatic sense. What
impact do you really think they had
diplomatically in 1975? Well, I
think it had a lot of diplomatic impact on... in the
Soviet Union. They played it up much more than we
did here. And I think
that
the
only way that you ever change attitudes is
in Russia. is sort of everybody together,
long-term, or no single big event. You know,
that's not true. No, it just takes time to change
people's attitudes, and particularly to make
them more friendly. You can make them an enemy real
quick by doing something bad to them, but to make
them friendly takes a long, long time, And it's
just a matter of continuing to be friendly towards
them and to do things towards them that they
perceive as friendly. And so it takes a lot of
effort. And you just have to go ahead and make the
investment realizing that... that you're not
going to just get an instant reward. And somebody
said, Machiavelli or somebody said that in
matters of importance, you can't hope to sow and
reap at the same time. And that's a case like the
Russian. You can't hope to reap all the
friendship. You can only sow and then sow again in
another year or two and then continue to sow good
deeds and hopefully someday you can reap the
benefits. But you can't be disappointed because
you don't reap them initially because you're just
not. It's not the way of the world, I don't think.
You're talking like we haven't reaped the
benefits yet. Or maybe we have a little bit. But I
think that we ought to jump at the chance to do that
because being friends with them is so much better
than fighting them that you ought to just, any
chance, if they came up and said, well, let's have
this little get-together and do this and this, if
there's any way we could do it with not
jeopardizing our own defense posture or
something like that, we ought to go do it. I mean, we
ought to do everything we can to up the trade with
them and to exchange non-military things with
them and... to try to be friendly because you want
to end up being friends with those people. You
don't want to fight them. You just have to, you
know, in order to be friendly, you've got to be
friendly.
So I think it was really good, but I don't think we
could look for any benefit at the moment. It's more
of a long-term kind of thing. Did you see any
negative things come out of it?
I didn't see any negative things. I think we taught
them a lot that's helped them make their space
program better. In other words, I think the thing
that we taught them was generally an attitude
about man in space can do things and to go ahead and
try it, try to repair it on orbit, try to figure ways
to make things work where they never seemed to have
that attitude before. So I think they gained a
tremendous benefit from that I don't feel that we
gained much of a benefit, because we were so far
ahead of them in all these areas, that we're going
to have to look to increased friendship as the
benefit, which they can too. We've gone more than
halfway, but I think that you want to go more than
halfway if you have to. I mean, even if you have to go
90% of the way, eventually if it leads to
friendship... Go the 90%, you know, it's worth it.
So I'm glad we did it, and I think we ought to do it if
we have another chance. Okay, the Soviet Union has
taken foreign nationals in space with them. Yeah.
Why do you think the U.S. has not done that in the
past?
I don't think...
I don't think it would be a nice thing to do.
However, I don't think anybody perceived it as
nice a thing to do as
just doing the job we had to do. For example,
I don't know if France would like us better if we
took a Frenchman in space or not. I think we'd
eventually do it. But, and I think with Space
Shuttle we ought to try to include multinational
crews and things. But before we've been trying to
do certain scientific things and although we
could have done it with foreign nationals,
it was easier to do it and not worry about that part
of the problem. And I don't know if it would have,
helped us anymore. You know, these things are
helpful, but they're long-term helpful. I guess
we'll end up taking some Frenchmen, because we
have some in the space lab.
Claude Nicollier, nice guy. He's really Swiss. So
I don't know. I guess we could have. We just didn't
put that as a high priority. It's sort of like we
probably could have found... a black person that
knew enough, that knew enough flying or something
to go to the moon. But it was,
the best qualified people we had weren't, so we
didn't do that. But we could have, I mean, you could
have put a black person in the right seat of any
lunar mission, I think you'd have been just as
successful as it was. But I guess we didn't worry
about that so much as trying to get the best
qualified people we knew. You know, almost
speaking of NASA, I don't know, it's early years,
it's being self-centered. Like, you know, in its
own organization, do you think we're basically
just concerned with our own interests in our own
program and not necessarily? Apollo Soyuz was
a... an open gesture. But besides that, would you
say it's mostly been closed within itself?
Well, I...
I don't think of it exactly the same way you said it
there. I think that NASA is charged with doing
certain things in space for the government, you
know. And as a result... And no one else is charged
to do those things. So I think you then begin to
think on how you're going to do them for the
government. I mean, you know that you work for
Congress and the president, but still your job is
to do such and such in the best way. And so... you do
tend to get to be a closed unit because you're the
ones that are working on it and thinking about it.
Not very many other people are. For example, those
of us in NASA aren't wondering whether or not they
ought to build additional Trident submarines. I
mean, we're not qualified to say. We don't do
studies on it. And we're counting on the people
that Congress has appointed in charge of the Navy
to do that part of the job. It's a little bit like a
football team. You kind of know what the other
people are doing, but you've got a certain man to
block or you've got to run out for a pass. And if
you're supposed to run out for a pass, you better
not worry about what the other guy's doing so much
is trying to do your job. If you can do your job and
help him, that's great. But generally, you know,
you have to do your own job. And our job was
exploration of space, so I guess we tended to
concentrate on that. And... I didn't see us as
closed, other than just the fact that we were the
only people working on the job. We weren't trying
to keep anybody out. Okay, along with the space
shuttle, do you see any reasons that it didn't meet
its original time schedule, the projected time
schedule, other than the monetary problems that
it involved? Well, yeah, I think probably that the
people that were making the decisions realized
that it was going to take longer and more money to do
the shuttle than they
could sell the program on. And so they said, let's
be as optimistic as we can. Let's don't be
dishonest and lie, but what... What is the
earliest we can do it? What's the cheapest we can do
it? I mean, think cheap, think soon. And you know,
when you start doing things like that, you can
convince yourself that things
could happen pretty quick, pretty cheap. And be
honest, you know, honest. Because it's just a
guess, an educated guess. I mean, it's more than
just sitting here guessing, but it's still a
guess, just with more details. So I think they
tried to guess on the short side because it was more
palatable. It's like the president right now,
playing like he didn't know there was going to be a
recession. At the same time, he was going to stop
inflation. I mean, how was he going to do it? If he
didn't put people out of work, how was he going to
keep people from spending money? I mean, it's
like... You've got to have one without the other.
He's going to give them more money and hope they
don't spend more and thus make more inflation? I
mean, it doesn't make sense. The only way that he
can stop inflation is to get a recession and cut
people's money off. Then they don't have money to
spend, and then the prices come down.
But you notice he never says that. He never says,
look, I knew this was going to be this way. Do you
know any other way to stop people from spending
money other than cut their money off? I mean, he
never says it that way. But, you know, he's got to
know it. I mean, he's dumb. And so I think
what occurred was was there was this optimistic
estimate, because I don't think we really ran into
any
more unknown problems than we would expect. We had
trouble with the tiles and the engines. But in a big
development program like that, you know you're
going to have trouble with something, so maybe we
didn't know it was those two things. However, we
knew two or three things would pop up. so i think
more it's more of and probably when they allowed
time they didn't allow time to solve those because
they congress wanted something happening i mean
you know the car dealer saying man we can get your
new car in six weeks six weeks later they're
telling you it ought to be in any day and it really
comes in and In ten weeks, and they knew all along it
was going to be ten weeks. Now, they had a couple
come in in six weeks. But generally, it's ten
weeks. But they never tell you ten weeks because
you don't want to hear it. You want to hear six
weeks. Because if you don't, you go to the other
dealer and they tell you six weeks. You buy from
them. So, it's just the way of the world. It's one of
the reasons I don't want to do any of that sort of
thing. I don't want to be part of that kind of thing.
I don't want to tell Congress something like that.
What is NASA's plans after the space show? I think
NASA's plans, as soon as we get it going and try to
get a lot of paying customers, then begin to start
constructing some sort of space station. And I
think this will happen uh... within ten years
because we'll have all the elements and we can
build space stations not cheap but not anywhere
like it cost to go in apollo or to build a space
shuttle so uh... i look for uh... some sort of new
start here in another four years let's say when
reagan gets let's say if reagan were re-elected
then he would know it was his last term by then he
would start to have the economy under control I
think and when he did then he would be looking for
something like this to help the economy and to help
progress and if he's the kind of person Reagan is
strikes me as the kind of man that would He's very
much interested in research and development and
keeping a good defense. He seems like a person
that's not just doing something for today. He's
trying to get the Social Security thing on a paying
basis. He was recently voted down by a bunch of
congressmen that know damn well that it ain't
going to float if they voted it, and they still
voted it. So he seems to have more guts. So my guess
is he'll want the space program to enlarge, but he
can't do it now because of the money. What about any
unmanned plans, just continuation of
exploration of our planet? That, just like that,
and try to get some little programs so that people
won't lose interest. But his biggest problem is
the economy and defense. And so as a result of that,
even though he might want to do these, he can't.
He's caught in a terrible situation where people
have left him with lots of debts. You know, all
these debts, it's like somebody... What's
occurred here is like my parents and me partly, in a
way, have run up tremendous credit card debts We
just lived high, you know, and bought all sorts of
stuff. Right now, you and me too at the end, but your
generation, somebody's got to pay the debts. I
mean, somebody's got to pay for the new car,
figuratively speaking, my parents got that
couldn't afford... Somebody's got to pay for it.
Sooner or later, the guy comes around, okay? And
the story about, you know, we're all just
borrowing from each other doesn't work because
people borrow from each other, but you still got to
pay it back. So that's what happened. The people of
last generation, our generation, have lived way
beyond their means and run it up on a credit card,
the tune of a trillion bucks. And sooner or later,
you got to pay because the guys that owe the money to
want to be paid. And they left that with Reagan, and
he's not even paying off the debt, you know. He's
just trying to service the interest. Can you
imagine what our life would be like if we had to
spend more money per year than we made to live and
pay the interest on our debt? I mean, it wouldn't
work as an individual at all. It doesn't work as a
country either. But that's what's occurred, and
so it's just tough on him. But at least he's trying.
How do you assess the pluses and minuses of your
whole career?
Hadn't been any minuses. Hadn't been many
minuses, no. So it was all worth it? Oh, yeah, it was
all worth it. It was great. I had a lot of heartaches
because I didn't maybe fly on Gemini and want to,
but then it turned out okay. No, I would... At the
time, you know, I may wanted to do this or do that and
didn't get to do it. But all in all, it just was a
wonderful adventure. And I was lucky and got to
make two flights. But I mean, even if only got to
make one, it would be worth it. I mean, if I'd only
made one flight, I would still give you the same
answer. And it's also, when you're waiting,
you're not just standing around the room waiting.
I mean, you're doing things that are interesting.
And also, you're educating yourself in a lot of
things. And the opportunities for learning
things and all
the things that went along with the space program
could never, ever be gained anywhere else. And so
I... If I had to give the rest of my life for it, you
know, stay in NASA and be repetitive, let's say
train new astronauts over and over again, it would
definitely be worth it. I don't have to do it, which
is just luck, and I can go off and start a brand new
career that I like. But... No, I can't think of a
negative. At the time, they seemed it. And
certainly I could invent a career that was better.
I mean, I could have flown a couple of flights in
Gemini, and then I could have made the first lunar
landing instead of Neil. I mean, I could have done a
lot of other stuff that would have been even more
fantastic. But, you know, you don't really expect
that. You just expect... You just can't hardly
expect to do more and have a happier 18 years than
what would I do that was better. I gave you some
examples, but you really can't expect them.
You've got to be happy with what comes along. How do
you think being an astronaut affects, not
necessarily you personally, but basically being
an astronaut affects those men's later lives?
gives them a great freedom to be like they really
are. And so it satisfies
the need to be famous or recognized or somebody
saying you're a good person, you know, or you're
brave or something, which men like. And so it
satisfies that. And then once it's satisfied...
then it lets you go beyond it. Whereas if that's not
satisfied, I don't think you can go beyond it. It's
a little bit like mounting a hill or a mountain.
Unless you mount those hills of being famous,
worthy, and all that, you can't ever get beyond
them. And so I think what it does is it lets people go
beyond that. It lets them get to the top, they see
that, and then they... They can climb another one
higher if that's what they want. Or they can go down
and do something else. But it's a great thing for
your personal life because it fills an incredible
square in
your life that you've always wanted to fill. And if
you don't, will have, I think, a detrimental
effect. So I think it couldn't be better. I mean, it
just couldn't be. Now, I think you've got to go in
with the attitude that a lot of this is out of your
control. And so you're going to tend to accept what
you get as good. You know what I mean? I mean, like I
said, I gave you a career that was a lot better than
mine, okay? But I... if i couldn't be happy with the
one i had it'd be something wrong with me i mean
that's the same way with everybody that flew i mean
if they couldn't be happy with the career they had
there's something wrong because we had the very
best thing you could have and if everybody's got to
be neil armstrong something's wrong i mean you got
to get a better attitude you've got to get an
attitude that what you get out of it, you like,
because the opportunities were there for so much
other than just the flying. I mean, you got to meet a
lot of people. And really, one of the things I liked
the best was I did. I got to meet a lot of people that
were successful or famous or rich or a lot of other
things. And you really, then you can look around
and sort of decide, with the knowledge instead of
wondering what it's like you can see what it's like
and then you can decide for your own life what
you're going to do with it whereas maybe if maybe
for example you didn't see how rich people lived in
the life they have you would always want that life
you still might you might want to eat more but by
seeing it then you can make a more educated
judgment unto what you want to do so being an
astronaut lets you look at all the options
available in life and then you could pick the one
you wanted to go for, like your dad did, or I did, or
somebody else, and be content to, and not really be
going this way, and wish you were going that way,
and a lot of people never get here, because they
also want to go back over here, and you can't go both
places, and they go this way, and then they go this
way, and then this way, and they never really just
say, this is better, and I realize I'm giving up a
lot of here, and I'm just going to go that way, and If
I get here and didn't want to go there, then I'll
come back. But I'll never get here unless I go there
and I realize that by going here, I can't go there
simultaneously. So
there's an old story that a ship is a very lucky
thing because it can only go to one destination at a
time. But if you look at the history of a ship, then
it goes lots of places. But if people were like
that, they'd be much better off too because then
they can go. Because they can only go one place at a
time, but they don't know it. And so they go like
this, and they really want to go here, here, or
here, and they spend their life doing this, and
finally they say to hell with it, I can't make it.
And really, they could have gone just like this
with a lot less trouble. So I think NASA helps a lot.
It's one of the luckiest things to ever happen to
anyone.